Would you turn with me to Genesis chapter 42 as we go chapter by chapter verse by verse?
Lots here in today's passage.
The vision will come to pass, but it's more than the vision just coming to pass for Joseph.
The vision needs to be reminded to his father, Jacob, and we'll see that when we get to the end.
He's forgot his dream.
I believe Joseph has survived these 20 years because he held on to his dream.
Jacob thinks we're all going to die, and he ends this chapter with saying, all things are against me, and he doesn't even know that after all these years of his dream, it's coming to pass.
God is bringing this to pass.
He's faithful.
All the promises of God are yes and amen.
We're going to see that start to come to pass here, and I could say much more about
Let's just get into that word as we start and we'll look at Joseph who stays true.
We're going to see the 10 brothers head to Egypt.
And then we're going to see the dream come to pass verse six.
Then God's going to begin his work in his brothers seven through 24.
And there's a word there for us because God wants to do a work in us.
God is far from done with us and I'll give you
I'll give you a forewarning, you know, in case you want to leave now.
I'm going to talk about that word repentance.
And I want to tell you, it's one of the most freeing, gifting gifts from God is that we have the ability to repent and turn away from where we were heading and the things we were doing and turn back and come on to Him.
And He says, I'll never leave you nor forsake you.
And I'll by no means cast you out.
And what we have is just a beautiful word as God starts to work in these 10 brothers after 20 years of what they have done to Joseph.
And it's a demonstration to all of us that God's never done with us.
He doesn't just give up and goes, 20 years, you guys haven't repented of this.
I'm moving on, but instead we see I've arranged the whole world so that I can speak to you about this.
And I believe God does that for each and every one of these 10 brothers are no different than any 10 of us in this place.
And God wants to work in them just like He wants to work in us because every last one of us are a gift unto the Lord.
And then we're going to see the brothers head back to their father, verse 25 through 34.
At that point, we'll just kind of read through getting ready for chapter 43, but Jacob forgets the promise of God and how we'll weave all that together.
So Lord, I thank You that You show us our great God who
Never gives up on us is always working in us.
We can think after 20 days that if we haven't changed that you're done with us and here you give us picture of these boys for 20 plus years and they're not just kids.
They're 40 to 50 to 60 years old at this point and yet you're still working.
You're still that great hound dog from heaven chasing them because you wish
for them to repent and be free from that guilty conscience that they have.
What a testimony that you give of your great love and your great demonstration, but also the great power.
You will rearrange and move the whole world, change the climate,
to bring on the feast and the famine.
You'll change the geopolitical situation to bring this to pass, the Joseph's in Egypt at this point.
And Lord, what we're watching you did then 4,000 years ago, you do hear right now is we're watching the world shape.
And we'll talk about that in prophecy.
And so Lord, have your way and take us away with you.
Let your word come alive.
And we know that it will not return void.
In your name, amen.
Well, the 10 brothers head to Egypt.
There's a severe land famine on the land, verse 57.
So all countries came to Joseph in Egypt to buy grain because the famine was severe in all the land.
It's a severe, it's a global famine.
It's not a local famine that we read.
There's even historical writings that speak about this.
period of time, which is interesting to me.
But verse one through five, when Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt, Jacob said to his sons, why do you look at one another?
I'm thinking, they probably really were looking, this, you know, the name I wouldn't want during a famine, Reuben, yeah, because
And then brothers looking, Ruben.
Yeah, little corn beef, sauerkraut, you know, that thousand island dressing.
You toast it in a little bit of butter.
So Ruben's not feeling comfortable, but they're reaching.
We're at the seven year of plenty is over.
How far into the famine we don't know, but the bread is drying up.
Verse two, and he said, indeed,
I've heard that there's grain in Egypt.
Go down to that place and buy for us there that we may live and not die."
So Joseph's 10 brother went down to buy grain in Egypt, but Jacob did not send Joseph's brother Benjamin with his brothers for he said, least some calamity befall him.
Benjamin would be the last of that family name because he believes Joseph is dead.
pertinent for what we're going to read today as God's going to draw out of these brothers what they have done.
Verse 5, and the sons of Israel went to buy grain among those who journeyed for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
So it's showing that there's like this whole caravan moving towards Egypt that people, the only way to find bread is here with this
in Egypt as the rest of the world has come to this severe famine.
You know, doesn't that sound familiar though?
Go get, we're all gonna die.
Oh, this is upon us.
We're dead, we're doomed.
And we can get into that place where we just go like, oh, seven years of plenty.
Now I'll say things start drying up and we start going, where are you?
What are you doing?
Oh, we're going to die.
All things Jacob at the end.
He's going to say, oh, he's going to use that word.
All things are against me.
He has no idea that the true word that should be used.
All things work together for good for those who love God called according to his purposes.
Romans 828, he misses that promise.
Joseph's hanging on to it, but Jacob's bailing from it and they all come to this place.
Oh, we're all going to die.
Jacob's just like the rest of us.
I get it.
I can critique you all day, Jacob.
But boy, do I know you because I look at you every day.
I look in the mirror and I think of all these things where I'm like, what's going on?
Where are you?
Why are these things continuing, continuing Lord?
And I just want to
Bring us and start.
Maybe you're in, all things are against me.
Maybe you're in a famine right now.
The feast days that you once enjoyed, and I think that becomes one of the hardest things of when you enjoy the feasting.
The goodness, things are great, prosperity, you know, relationally, materially, physically, health-wise, and all these ministerially, and all these things, and all the same things start drying up.
We go, where are you?
I think it's as hard, you know, I think it's hard after you've come from the prosperity part.
And I mean that not financially, just everything's so great.
And I just want to give this for anyone here today.
Psalm 23, verse 1.
You see my highlighting and the point's going to be, he leads me.
That means he's in front of me.
He's before, he's with me.
And then you'll see my last part.
He follows me.
That's the omnipresent God who has the ability, the all-knowing omniscient God, the omnipotent, all-powerful God.
He can go in front of me and prepare a way, and that's what he's doing here.
He can be with me while I'm traveling through that.
But then he's got my back and he's following after me to guard my past, and we're going to talk about that.
Today, as we look at these boys, after 20 years, they're still not free.
And if that's you today and there's something that's been dogging you for a whole lifetime, God's going to speak a word to you that you can be free before you leave this place today.
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.
He makes me to lie down in green pastures.
He leads me besides the steel waters.
He restores my soul.
He leads me in the path of righteousness for his namesake.
Yay, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death.
I will fear no evil for you or with me.
Your rod and your staff, they comfort me.
You know, when you read this, it's like the poet, David, he's
going through the valley of shadow of death, but he's talking about this present place that God's with him and that he's giving him peace, even though he's going through whatever seems like this.
Whoa, is me?
All these things are against me as we just read in the beginning of our passage here.
And in verse five, you prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemy.
You anoint my head with oil.
My cup runs over.
Surely goodness.
And mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.
And I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever.
Lord, I just want to pray again, not for the message.
I want to pray for my brothers and sisters who may feel they're going through the valley of a shadow.
Something's hovering over them and casting a dark shadow over them.
Maybe it's relational.
Maybe it's financial.
Maybe it's health, maybe it's a ministry.
Children, the list goes on.
Would you comfort those who mourn?
Would you let them know that you are going ahead, prove it through this passage today?
You went ahead 20 years and 20 years ago, you prepared this moment for their
valley in their shadow.
We never know what you're doing 20 years in advance and what comes 20 years, but we know when that 20 years comes or 20 days or 20 minutes that you've been there waiting for us because that's what an omnipresent omniscient, all-knowing, mighty God can do.
And Lord, that you would give that comfort, that you prepare a table,
You give that comfort, the goodness and mercy.
We'll never leave or depart.
Remind us of Psalm 23 this day, I thank you Lord.
In your name, amen.
Verse 3 and 4, as he talked about Benjamin, hey, don't send Benjamin down there.
You know, Benjamin's in his 20s at this point.
And so,
That means the brothers, as we look at this, they're 40, 50, some of them are in their 60s when you do all the math.
That's pretty significant.
And they're not just young boy teenagers.
I mean, this is adults.
And yet there's still these things that as adults, we can never get right until God gets right before us and speaks.
And he will here in this case.
And so verse six, as we look at that,
The first dream comes to pass and this is going to be that the brothers come and bow down before him.
Now Joseph was governor over the land and it was he who sold to all the people of the land and Joseph's brother came and bow down before him with their faces to the earth.
We know that back in Genesis 37.
This dream, that was 20 plus years ago.
that Joseph said this would, this is the dream that God had given me.
And the brother said, show you indeed reign over us.
And yes, the dream comes to pass.
Christian, it's not just Joseph.
It's you and I as well.
God will move the whole world to bring that to pass in your life that He purposes.
Whether it's a dream, a vision, a word, something God has spoken.
And I know there can be some long times and hard times for you singles.
I know it.
I was there.
And I know it can seem like a long time and a hard time for you that have lost love.
Maybe it's through someone left you.
Maybe it's through the fallen world and the love was taken through health reasons, whatever it may be.
There's so many of these things that can leave us void in this place and our heart and our lives, but may we not forget that God moved the whole atmosphere for 14 years to bring on a feast.
The now rises, they're silt and the now becomes the most fertile crescent, Lance, why the fertile crescent.
And then he dries it up.
And then comes this famine, but he's done all these pieces that he might move these boys to bring them to this place.
And as a big picture, may we understand where God is going with this as well is when this is over, you know, in a few chapters, they're all coming down.
Jacob 70 coming to Egypt because, you know, God's going to do.
He's going to fulfill Jacob's dream.
Jacob's forgot his dream, but I'm gonna make you outnumber the stars in heaven.
And you're gonna be a great nation that I'm gonna do a great thing through speaking very specifically.
It's gonna be about the Messiah to come.
70 will come into Egypt through Joseph.
And when they leave 400 years later, 2.5 million will leave.
We know that number roughly because 600,000 of them will be fighting men.
And God is fulfilling Jacob's dream right here as well as Joseph's dream in this moment.
And he's moving the whole world to bring it into its place and into its play, the geopolitical that Egypt the greatest nation.
And then the greatest nation will be defeated 400 years from now by a bunch of slaves.
That's a mighty God who can raise up a bunch of slaves to beat the greatest empire on the earth.
But he'll move the atmosphere to bring this to pass and he will do that for you.
He'll do that for me.
I'll move all the pieces in your life personally to align for what you want.
I'll move this piece so you end up in this place to hear this word or this church or this ministry or this relationship and you can think it's never going to happen.
Everything seems so out of place.
And then God's like, man, I started working this 20 years ago in your life.
You don't even know it.
And Joseph, I'm going to bring this dream to pass.
Again, if the newsletter encourages you for that or the blog every, somewhere a couple days after we, we take the message and the notes and turn it into a blog.
It's kind of just a devotional of the passage that we studied and then some devotional things that we can ponder through the week.
That comes out a newsletter that comes out.
Sign up, go to the webpage and hit subscribe and you'll get the newsletter of that.
But with that, it's all comes out of the core context of our notes.
And there's about 20 pages of notes today tagged to this message.
It's kind of a commentary, verse by verse, a lot more detailed.
Where I go with that is, I choose not to right now, maybe someday I'll go back and rewind,
Joseph is a pitcher of Jesus Christ all the way through this.
Amazing pictures of Joseph and being like Jesus.
And Joseph and Daniel, the only two in the Bible that we don't read a charge laid against them.
They're not sinless, but their sins not spoken of.
They're pictures of Jesus.
And this is to me, I got dozens of them in today's
notes, but this is one that really jumped out that I just love and that here's Jesus and here's a word for you.
Everybody comes down.
We read last week, by the way, that they had distribution centers.
So if you were Egyptian, obviously, you go to the distribution center.
If you're a foreigner, you come to this distribution center.
Joseph's overseeing this one because the foreigners, he's making sure you're not spies.
He's checking you out, making sure there's not price gouging and all these type of things.
So these boys end up before Joseph in this manner.
But we read in here, no one is
turned away.
This is amazing that everyone who comes to Egypt gets grain.
And here's our greater than Joseph, Jesus, John 635, and Jesus said to them, I am the bread of life.
He who comes to me shall never hunger, and he who believes in me shall never thirst.
But I say to you that you have seen me and yet do not believe, he's speaking to the unbelieving
Jewish people, which is amazing picture of what we're reading here.
They don't recognize Jesus right now today.
They didn't recognize Joseph right now then.
But here's the word that's spoken.
Then, now and here, for all of us, all that the Father gives me will come to me.
And the one who comes to me, I will by no means cast out.
God will turn no one away.
I reject the whole
Doctrine and theology that God chooses some and rejects other that is totally in defiance of Second Peter 3 9.
I wish none should perish that all should seek repens and there's this John I Will that all comes to me.
I will buy no mean cast out and I say that because I know the way the devil works Because I've heard it.
I've seen it and you know it and maybe it's you today God can't
He won't.
You don't know what I've done.
We know what these boys have done.
We're going to read through and we're going to see as God builds on this.
But I just want to stop right here.
Everyone that came, Joseph gave bread and everyone that comes to Jesus, Jesus will give the bread of life.
And no matter what you've done, where you've gone, years, however it may be,
God will receive you if you come and ask for forgiveness of your sin and turn away from it and come to Him and ask to be forgiven and washed by the blood of Jesus Christ.
I will by no means cast anyone out.
And then as we move to our core here, God begins to work in these 10 brothers.
He's going to draw out of them.
because he wants to bring them to this place.
I'm going to say it.
Again, I think I said it at the beginning.
So to give you one last chance, I'm going to talk about repentance.
If anybody wants to leave, because I know that's not a popular word in churches, I joke about that in this church because I know that's surely not you.
But it's a sad statement when churches and pastors are afraid to speak the word.
But let's not be
influenced by that because God wants to set captives free and no one can be set free without repentance.
Repentance and forgiveness are two and the same.
We repent
so that we can be forgiven.
Repentance means to turn away and turn to something.
We turn away from the way we're going, the things we're doing, and we turn to something and are something as Jesus Christ.
And so here God begins to work on these boys.
Verse seven and eight, Joseph saw his brothers and recognized them, but he acted as a stranger to them and spoke roughly to them.
Then he said to them, where do you come from?
And they said from the land of Canaan to buy food, we will see here shortly that he's speaking through an interpreter.
He's not speaking in Hebrew.
So Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him.
They're not going to recognize Joseph because I think sometimes you don't recognize the things that you're not expecting.
So the last thing we expect to see the number two in command is our brother Joseph, because we think he's dead, we'll read that, that one is no more.
So they think he's dead, they don't expect to see him, but mind you for the conversation, Joseph's about 37 years old now, because he was
when he got out of prison, we're seven years into this.
So he's 37, 38, 39 years old.
He's dressed like an Egyptian and Egyptian garb, the gold thing that's around his neck.
He's got his head shaving, we would expect, because that's how they did it for the leaders.
And then he probably has that eye makeup, you know, you all, should I just put a picture of your Brenner up there, right?
And then we all, oh yeah, that's what Joseph's looking like.
He probably looks like your Brenner.
And so, yeah, you got that.
And but he's going to start working on him and I'll rather read all the way down and come back.
I'll just get you to verse 21 when he starts talking roughly because he's drawing this out and you know sometimes he's just God just has to be very frank difficult and you know I love you but I'm going to speak very pointedly to you because you need to turn from this and he's going to use Joseph
to do this, and they're going to come, verse 21, then they said to one another, we are truly guilty concerning our brother, for we saw the anguish of his soul when he pleaded with us, and we would not hear, therefore, this distress has come upon us."
And Reuben answered them, saying, did I not speak to you, saying, do not sin against the boy, and you would not listen, therefore, behold, his blood is now required of it.
20 years, we're going to talk about this.
in a couple verses, 20 years.
They've had this guilty conscience for 20 years.
But here, what's one of the interesting things is
as we're reading through this and letting it develop before us, isn't it interesting?
They say to one another, they don't say, you know why?
Because remember this business deal?
You know why it's going down south on us?
Because remember that guy who lived over there, over the hill from us and we ripped him off?
Yeah, this is why.
Or, hey, you remember, you know why this is coming against us?
Because we, you know,
We didn't, you know, take a Sabbath or whatever it is.
They all turn and they all look at each other and go, this is why.
20 years, this is why.
They carried this for 20 years, this is why.
But back to this verse 21, as we look at Joseph, as we develop on this here for us today, they said to one another, we're guilty.
We are truly guilty concerning our brother for we saw the anguish of his soul when he pleaded with us and we would not hear when they put Joseph in that pit.
He pleaded not just like, Hey, what do you do?
It's an anguish.
Man, we're brothers.
We're flesh and blood.
He's pleading with them.
And as we studied that a couple of weeks ago, what did they do after they threw him in the pit?
They went and had lunch.
didn't even phase them what they did to their brother.
And here they throw him in this pit and he's crying.
How far did they have to walk?
Ah, let's not do lunch here because we can still hear him crying.
Let's go another hundred yards.
So the crying drowns out on us.
And here's the point that I make about this.
It's called meekness.
And every last one of us need to ask Lord, am I meek?
You know what meekness is?
It's power under control.
That's the biblical definition.
Jesus, meek, and mouth.
Moses, the meekest man on the earth.
Meekness is power under control when you have the power and yet you don't exercise it in authority and Lord over somebody.
He has the power to correct and to bring justice for what they did.
They're guilty.
I'm going to bring justice for what you just did.
And there's no revenge in this man.
That is unbelievable.
We were talking after second service, and hopefully I can do better this service as we talk about when we confess and we repent before somebody.
And I said, be ready, because we think we're going to come and we're going to say, I'm sorry for what I did.
And they're going to say, oh, it's OK. God bless you.
I forgive you.
How many times should I forgive 70 times 70?
I go, you got to be ready because some people just been waiting for their opportunity to, I've been waiting for this so I can really tell you what a lousy, scoundrel, horrible person you are.
You call yourself a Christian and I said, you, I, we need to be ready.
When we repent before another person to ask that we're sorry for what we've done, that they may not come and say, I forgive you.
They may say, I don't forgive you because of what you've done to me.
But that's on them when we get to that place.
But here's the meekness of Joseph.
He has the full power.
I think it would have been recorded for us if it happened.
But more so, I see the heart of Joseph here with his brothers.
And what I mean by this that I say is, Potiphar and Potiphar's wife are still alive.
Potiphar would have had to sit in his staff meetings.
Think about that.
He's number two.
He's going to call the cabinet.
Potiphar's wife is still alive.
These 10 brothers come before him and they are still alive at this moment.
And what's the power of the passage that we're reading right now is what gave him the ability to be that meekness.
It was the seminary of 13 years in slavery and imprisonment.
That's where he went to his seminary.
That's where God broke the man.
And you know what?
Sometimes that's what it's going to take for us extreme adversity for us to come and have the heart to forgive.
And the extreme adversity
We're like, wait a minute, we were the innocent party.
We were the ones that were wrong.
Why should I go through adversity?
Because God's going to do something greater in all of it.
And I know it's hard, but it's, you took me up.
When I said, I want to be more like you.
Father, forgive them.
They know what, not what they do.
Father, you took me up.
Charlie Kirk story.
Isaiah.
Here I am, send me.
God will take us up when we say, I want to become more like you.
Joseph goes through this 13 years of hardship, and here's what I know from walking this world for these years of my life is it's easy to become hardened.
It's easy to have a hardness of heart towards those that have offended us.
And there's something that God has to do with a situation that he puts us in, and it's this beautiful place, soften my heart with the oil.
The oil, the Holy Spirit, coupled with the Word of God, it starts slowly
dripping into this hard clay heart, the water of the word, the oil of the Holy Spirit that's represented through the Scriptures.
And he just starts making it pliable again.
So he can put his word into us.
He can change and conform us into his image.
And that's what brings us to a place that when we come to this situation, we can forgive.
We can say, Father,
Forgive them, they have no idea what they were doing.
Father, I trust that what you're doing is for my good, their good, and for whatever you'll do in the future.
That's a hard place to be.
I believe it took these 13 years for God to make this young man's heart this pliable place that he is that he can come into.
At 13 years, God did this great raising up of this man, but I want to say this as well.
Because especially for us since the American church, you know what was equally a proving ground and a testing ground for Joseph.
You would think 13 years of prison, slavery, slander slides against his characters, brothers, disowning, and the betrayal of all these things.
I'll tell you what's just as great, those seven years of plenty in power.
because that's the place that easily he could have came and go, you know what?
Life's good.
I got a nice house now.
I got a wife.
I got kids.
I got money in the pocket.
I got power.
I got a great job in all these things.
And he could have found himself backing off, but we know that he didn't because when this moment comes, he can still be this great man of God and stand before these brothers and be used by God to draw out what their need is because
These brothers need to be broken.
These brothers need to be melted and merged together to make a nation that when 70 of them come into Egypt, 2.5 leave and go on to become the greatest nation of the world that God has to point everyone of.
This is the nation that my Redeemer will come through.
And there's this thing we'll talk about in Prophecy Update.
That's why we do this every month.
If you want to know why this Bible is true,
We know by faith, but if you want one physical piece of evidence of why this Bible is true, I say one word, Israel.
No one can survive.
Here we got 4,000 years of history.
No one can survive 400 years in slavery.
No one can survive 2,000 years without a homeland.
No one can survive through a holocaust and yet there they still stand.
And what God's doing in the nation of Israel is a demonstration and a word that he speaks to us, my promises never fail.
And when I said, I'll never leave you nor forsake you.
I never left Israel even in all the rebellion and all the wayward things that they've done.
And that's my promise to you as well.
What an amazing picture that God gives us.
But I want to just ride through a couple things, and this is the kind of the core.
So when we're done here, we kind of just read through getting us ready as they retell the story and those type of things.
But I think one of the hardest things for us, especially in this day of, you know, we don't want to offend people.
We don't want, you know,
to be considered judgmental, legalistic, Bible thumping, and all these type of things.
But God gives us a word that we can set people free, whether they're believers or unbelievers, but it's the word repentance.
And He gives us this word, and maybe you need to hear the word today.
But God says in 2 Timothy 4, 2, preach the word, be ready in season out of season, convince, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and teaching.
He gives us the word of God that we can go and we can share this with a lost and dying world.
And I just want to walk you through some themes that are undeniable.
And until we theme it and string it together, we can miss it until we string it together.
John the Baptist, Jesus said, is the greatest what prophet that ever lived.
What was his message?
The first words that came out of his words when we read his public ministry.
Matthew 3-1, in those days, John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Judea and saying, repent for the kingdom of goddess.
First words out of his mouth, repent.
And if you want to talk about, he can be a little rough, because people will question Joseph, like, that was a little rough.
Well, I don't think, you know, we need the spirit of God of how we speak these things.
But here's John the Baptist in Matthew 3, 7, as these religious leaders, these Pharisees and Sadducees come, he says, you brood of vipers.
I'm not sure that's the way we want to start our public evangelism, but
It worked for him.
Verse 8, therefore bear fruits worthy of repentance.
First words out of John was repent.
Jesus first words that he began his public ministry.
From that time, Matthew 4, 17, Jesus began to preach to say repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
First words out of John the Baptist repent.
First words out of Jesus, repent.
You want to talk about unsettling, making people uncomfortable.
Here's what he said to these religious leaders, Matthew 1120, this is Jesus.
He began to rebuke the cities in which most of the mighty works had been done because they did not repent.
And then Jesus, Matthew 2011 verse 24 will say, but I say to you that it shall be more tolerable for you, for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for you.
He doesn't hold back.
He speaks these things.
He's given the full counsel of God.
And here the disciples first message.
Matthew 612, so they went out and they preached that people should repent.
Then we move on and here's Peter, his first
message, Acts 2, 34, 3,000 people will be saved.
It says they'll be cut to heart when he hears the word.
This ain't the first word, but Peter says in his message he makes it a central theme.
Then Peter verse 38 said to them, repent and let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sin and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
Acts 7
Acts chapter seven, Stephen the first martyr after the cross.
John the Baptist the first martyr before the cross.
He calls him, you stiff neck, done circumcised and hard.
He lays that out there.
But verse 54 of Acts seven says, when they heard these things, they were cut too hard.
Isn't it interesting when you look at this, is that Peter calls him stiff neck, gives them the word, the gospel, repent, and 3,000 people get saved.
Stephen preaches a sound gospel message, calls him stiff neck, and they stone him and kill him.
What am I gathering there of if you live in the results, you'll quit.
You will just quit sharing your faith because if we were looking at Stephen, we would go just quit.
We don't know what God's doing in anyone's heart, whether it's here comes Peter 3000 gets saved or here's Stephen that he gets stoned for these type of things.
All that we're required is I just give you the message that can set you free.
Paul will come.
He'll preach up on Mars.
He'll act 730.
Truly times of ignorance got overlooked, but now commands all men everywhere to repent.
It is the most freeing word.
Repent means to turn away and to follow.
It's a 180 degrees.
And here God, He starts working in these boys and He starts developing in them to bring them to the place of repentance.
And He'll say that same thing to the believer.
2 Timothy 3, 16, all Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.
Reproof means to correct and make an adjustment.
We're going to talk in the prophecy update of, you know, when a person's mind comes that they can no longer distinguish good and evil.
And we're going to apply that, how it fits to what we've been seeing in our society today as we look at these type of things.
God comes, offers this freedom.
And as we build on this, and we're going to talk about this seared conscience that they have,
We're going to see that they've lived for 20 years under this guilt.
Let's get there verse 9.
Verse 9, then Joseph remembered the dream, which he had dreamed about them and said to them, you are spies.
You've come to see the nakedness of the land.
If you hear these words, if we put into the context, as we develop this story for the next chapters to come, spies was a capital punishment, just like spying, or it was life in prison.
Spying in this country would be a capital punishment some days ago, Benedict Arnold type of the betrayal upon the land that we have here.
And so when they hear this word, your spies, they have to come to, this is the death penalty.
Or secondly, even if they let us go, we go without
food.
Death penalty again, because we're going to leave here without grain and we're all going to die.
But here's something I just find so amazing.
Verse 7, he sees his brothers.
And he starts what God has put on his heart to bring them to this place, to turn them from these things that they've never dealt with, to find out where their heart is, let them see where their heart is.
Verse 21, of course we see that they know this is because of what we did to our brother.
This is why we're in this place that we're in.
But it's not until verse 90, he goes, oh, the dream just came to pass.
amazing as as I look at this and it just this place that I look at Joseph I was so busy about my father's business I didn't notice that the dream came to pass okay this is amazing the dream has come to pass and he starts
What's next with these things?
Well, verse 10 and 11, and they said to him, no, my Lord, but your servant have come to buy food.
We are all one man's son.
We're honest men.
Your servants are not spies.
We're just honest guys.
I mean, yeah, there was this time that we sold our brother in the slavery, but other than that, we're just these great guys that come down to buy some food.
And do you notice that they still won't bring themselves at this point to what they've done.
they still are convinced, and they're even gonna go home and tell their dad and retell the story, and yet they still haven't come to the brokenness, but God, oh, the graciousness of God.
Verse 12 through 16, but he said to them, no, but you've come to see the nakedness of the land.
And they said, your servants are 12 brothers, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan, and in fact, the youngest is with our father.
Today, and one is no more.
So they believe that Joseph is dead, or they believe their lie.
Verse 14, but Joseph said to them, it is as I spoke to you, you are spies.
In this manner, you shall be tested.
By the life of Pharaoh, you shall not leave this place unless your younger brother comes here.
Send one of you
and let him bring your brother and you shall be kept in prison that your words may be tested to see whether there is any truth in you or else by the life of Pharaoh surely you are spies.
So Joseph
presses them on these things, but he's got this information that's going to move his heart.
We're going to see him weep, that Benjamin is alive.
Verse 17 through 20, so he put them all together in prison three days.
Then Joseph said to them, the third day, do this and live for I fear God.
Joseph said to them the third day do this live for I fear of God verse 19 if you're honest men let one of your brothers be confined to your prison to your prison house But you go and carry grain for the famine of your houses and bring your youngest brother to me so that your words will be verified and you shall not die and they did what the empathy that Joseph has is that he sins okay and
My first thought, and it's okay, he went and sought the Lord after three days, and God must have spoke to him.
Now this is the better plan, that I'm gonna keep nine of you and send one.
Well the fact is there's like 60 people up in Canaan we're gonna find out that need grain.
And I think Joseph comes, if I just send one and keep nine, they'll never take, one can't carry enough provision, it's probably like 250 mile journey when you do
Egypt to Canaan.
He's not going to be able to take enough food to the family.
And here he is.
He's fulfilling this empathy, this compassion that he has.
I'm going to keep one and send nine so that all the grain can go and sustain those people.
Just again, this place.
But you know, Christian, we're dead.
Or that there it is.
He didn't know.
It's 20 years later.
He didn't know that today was the day.
And the word for us, Ephesians 6, put on the whole armor of God that you may be able to stand against the wild, the devil.
He did not know, but we see a man who was ready for the day.
Are you ready for your day?
Tomorrow when you wake up, are you ready for your day?
You have no, we have no idea.
Today may be the day that I hear those words.
It's terminal.
Today may be the day that you hear those words.
I'm done.
I'm gone.
Goodbye.
Today may be the day that you wake up and you hear those words.
The boss says, we're downsizing.
Today may be the day you wake up.
You have no idea that today is the day that she grabs hold of the robe and says, lie with me.
Joseph was ready for his day, day after day after day as we read this man and his ways and we're just marvel at him
was always ready for the day.
And the only way to be ready for the day is to be starting the day.
Lord, I come before you.
Lord, I don't know what's before my day, but the two of us go through this day together, whatever you put my way.
And then when you have a word from the Lord, and all these things I just said about when you go to talk to somebody and you're gonna say these words, repent, or you're gonna go and be put in the place that God's gonna use you as a voice, you have to be soaked in the Spirit.
I have to be soaked in the Holy Spirit.
And if I'm not sitting
and know that God has me, has my ear, and his hands upon me, I could come off bitter, I can come off sharp, but here Joseph, you know, he knows he's being led by the Lord, later down the road, here we see that he's making these decisions, but to this point, a great point.
Hang with me on this.
Verse 21 through 24, look at the guilty conscience.
Then they said to one another, we are truly guilty concerning our brothers, for we saw the anguish of his soul when he pleaded with us, and we would not hear, therefore, that this stress came upon us, and Reuben answered them, saying, did I not speak to you, saying, do not sin against the boy, and you would not listen.
Therefore, behold, his blood is now required of us, but they did not know that Joseph understood them, for he spoke to them through an interpreter, and he turned himself away from them,
then he returned to them again and talked with them, and he took Simeon from them and bound him before their eyes.
I know we're hitting our mark.
I want to tell you something.
After 35-plus years of walking with the Lord, walking with people, speaking with people, I can't tell you how many people I've watched.
self-destruct because they could not bring themselves to a repentance.
And they carried the guilty conscience for all those years.
Because they think that he's not who he says that he is.
I will forgive you.
I will by no means cast you all who come to me.
They don't believe, maybe it's even you today.
If we confess our sins, he's faithful and just to forgive us our sin and cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
And they can't believe that he is who it is.
And I watch people say, I've gone too far, saved and unsaved.
He'll never receive me.
And then I'll say it's, I will drown this out through work.
I'll drown this out through
play things.
I'll drown this out through drugs, alcohol, experiences, physically, and these type of things.
And they just keep bringing themselves to this place over and over.
You know, the most freest man again is the one that's in prison.
The freest man, Joseph,
He went in the prison, God met him, extreme adversity, softened his heart with the Holy Spirit and gave him a word to stand on and hear these brothers are 20 plus years and they still cared.
Every day they would look at each other.
It's obvious.
Soon as this came, they knew their guilty conscience came up.
It was because what we did to Joseph and they could not bring themselves to set themselves free.
And what is repentance?
It's simply coming.
Lord, I've sinned against you."
That's what David said.
He sinned against Uriah.
But he comes, Lord, against you and you only have I sinned.
In the first place we come, Lord, forgive me.
But there will come a place that God will say, now it's your turn to go to that person and say, forgive me.
I'm sorry for what I've done.
Someone asked me this morning, well, how do I do that?
I go, you know what?
Any opportunity you get, you take it.
One of the things I would encourage is you send that email.
You send a text going, hey, brother, hey, sister.
I'd like to call you on the phone or see you face to face so that I can say to you, I'm sorry for what I did to you.
I was wrong.
Could we set that up?
And I say that is, it's kind of a softening that you don't catch them blindsided, they have times, they see you and their nerves rise up, maybe you're gonna see them at a family gathering, maybe you're gonna see them at a funeral, whatever it may be, but you are softening of, and then I'd like to say it face, I want you to hear it in my, but any time and any way you can get it, you get it, you take it, and then we have these things.
And by the way, as the Lord
tells us in Hebrews 12, if you're a Christian and you can not be moved by the wrong that you've done somebody.
Hebrews 12, 5, 12, 6,
Verse five, and you have forgotten the exhortation which speaks to you as sons.
My son do not despise the chasing out of the Lord, nor be discouraged when you are rebuked by him.
For whom the Lord loves, he chastens and scourges every son whom he receives.
If you endure chastening, God deals with you as a son for what son is there, whom the Father does not chasten.
But if you're without chastening, of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate and not sons.
If the Lord isn't chastening you or chastening me when I've done these type of things, I really have to ask myself, why?
the beauty and the freedom God is bringing these boys the ability to be set free by coming to a confession and Setting go but here like I said some people 20 years so Inverse 25 through 34 they're gonna head back to their father and
Retail the story.
and let's just read it.
Then Joseph gave a command to fill their sacks with grain, verse 25, to restore every man's money to his sack and give them provisions for the journey thus he did for them.
So they loaded their donkeys with grain and departed from there, but as one of them opened his sack to give his donkey feed at the encampment, he saw his money, and there it was in the mouth of his sack.
So he said to his brothers, my money has been restored and there it is in my sack, then the men's heart failed them, and they were afraid
saying one another, what is this that God has done?
They blame God, you know, that's what we always do when things don't go wrong.
But what they're going to think is they're going to think we stole it.
Verse 29 through 34, then they went to Jacob, their father in the land of Canaan and told them all that had happened to them saying, the man who is Lord of the land
spoke roughly to us and took us for spies in the country.
But we said to him, we are honest men.
We are not spies.
Look at them.
They aren't getting the move that God's doing because they're still lying to their father.
They won't say, Dad, this is why we think.
He roughed us up.
Verse 32, we are 12 brothers, sons of a father.
One is no more, and the youngest is with our father this day in the land of Canaan.
Then the man, the lord of the country, said to us, by this I will know that you are honest men.
Leave one of your brothers here with me.
Take food for the famine of your household and be gone.
And bring your youngest brother to me so I shall know that you are not spies, but now that you are honest men,
I will grant your brother to you and you may trade in the land."
So they retell the story and we end with, Jacob forgets his promise.
I've talked about that up front already.
Let's read through it.
Verse 35 and 36, then it happened as they encamped, as they emptied their sacks that surprisingly each man's bundle of money was in his sack.
Rest stop.
One finds out.
They don't go and check the others.
Now they're with dad.
They open.
Now all the money's there.
And when they had their and when they and their father saw the bundle of money, they were afraid.
And Jacob, their father said to them, you have bereaved me.
Joseph is no more.
Simeon is no more.
You want to take Benjamin?
All these things are against me.
Then Ruben spoke.
to his father saying, kill my two sons.
That's pretty stupid.
If I do not bring him back to you, put him in my hands and I will bring him back to you.
But he said, my son shall not go down with you for his brother is dead and he is left alone.
If any calamity should befall him along the way in which you go, then you will bring down my gray hair with sorrow to this grave.
Let's have the worship team come back and we're going to close in worship.
But as we do that, I point you to that word, verse 36, all these things are against me.
He uses that big word all because he forgets that promise
of Romans 828, all things work together for good for those who love God.
He forgets the promise of Jeremiah 2911 that God would speak to all of us.
I know the thoughts that I think towards you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of an evil.
And he forgot Genesis 35, the promise that I will make you this great nation to outnumber the stars in heaven.
It's easy for us to forget our all.
when we come into a time such as this, but here we see his all.
He doesn't know that this amazing moment is just literally days away as he's going to see his son and he's going to be there in the land with him.
And I just leave you with this.
God never told him 20 years
He thinks Joseph's dead.
God never told him, your son's alive.
Because there's this walk of faith that God knows when he's working, this work of faith in us, there's certain things that he tells us and doesn't tell us because that's how the faith is going to work.
And Jacob, he's forgotten his dream.
and sometimes we can forget our dream in the middle of the hardship.
But here God comes and gives us a story for today of, I've never stopped moving the world.
Father, brothers and sisters here, all of us go through some adversity and as we started and as we prayed early, I finish with that prayer right now that
Lord, we can't see all these things.
And there are certain things you just don't choose to tell us of what's happened and what's specific the day that is to come.
But Lord, Jacob doesn't know that he's literally just days away from seeing the one he thought he had lost.
And Lord, as well,
You're doing this work in these boys.
They're not young boys anymore.
They're 40, 50, 60 years old.
They still need to be broken so that you can melt and make a nation out of them.
And so this is amazing story as we look at these things and we see ourselves in all these things.
And I thank you, Lord, that you would break us and that you would work in us whatever it takes to bring us to that place.
that you want to conform us.
And if there's any of us that need to hear that word or repent and turn from, it's as simple as repent and turn, walking away that we can walk into this newness of life.
For you will by no means cast any of us away.
And as you said to that woman that they brought that day with stones in hand, nor do I condemn you.
What an amazing grace of the God that we have.
So speak your heart as we sing this last song, let it move, and have a way with us.
I pray in your name, amen.